---
layout: post
title: Week 14
---

CS373 - Software Engineering: The Good Parts
---

Aight, finally the last week of class, and final is happening in a few days!

Looking back at the class, I'm glad I took it as it gave me the chance to learn about all good the things that I always wanted to learn but couldn't find time for. Also, the class forced me to read and write a lot, which is also a huge plus. I feel so proud looking at all the tools/frameworks/languages that before the class, I either knew nothing or very little about. 

Just a little recap of what I have learned to do this semester:

Practical knowledge:
---
- Continuous integration with TravisCI
- Creating a dynamic website with React + Bootstrap (front-end) and Flask (back-end).
- Deploying a website on Google App Engine, and later customize the process using Docker + Kubernetes.
- Documenting APIs on Apiary & testing them with Postman.io

Good ol' theoretical stuff:
---
- SQL & UML
- Design Patterns in Java & Python
- Functional programming in Python
- Ethics in Computer Science
- Regular Expression in depth

By no means the above is a comprehensive list. For more details, definitely take a look at the class' [homepage](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/downing/cs373/index.html) and the [schedule](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/downing/cs373/Schedule.html).

Overall, it was a good class. I learned a whole bunch of things, made friends with lots of cool people, and achieved what I wanted to do before taking this class. Dr. Downing is effective in teaching and very helpful if you come to his office hours to talk to him.

---

Below are my concerns about this class. I hope Dr. Downing will find a way to address these issues and make the class even greater for the future generations of UTCS.

The disconnection between the lectures, the assignments and the exams
--
During lectures, you'll learn about the difference nuances of Python as a language, then come design patterns in Java all of a sudden, and some SQL and Regular Expression will come up sometimes, etc. Prof Downing does a great job explaining the very details of the subject matter, but then you'll often find yourself wondering what the big picture is for all these, or what's the use of all that the professor's teaching. 

When it comes to the assignments, you are asked to use React/Flask/Google Cloud Platform/SQLAlchemy (remember none of these are formally taught in the class) to build a dynamic website. I wouldn't say these are super hard to learn, but they do require a significant amount of time to get used to, on top of all the things you need to get done for the projects (10+ user-stories, API documentation, few-thousand-word report, unit tests, presentation...) 

During the development of the website, our deployments to Google App Engine were constantly failing, pretty much for every different reason each time. That was when I decided to write our own Docker image and move everything to Kubernetes Engine instead. It was less painful for sure, but issues still remained until the very last day. Only till then I thought about automating the deployment process with Docker, TravisCI and Google Cloud, and wished we were asked to do this for the IDB project instead of the Collatz one.

Teamwork is really tricky as well. Most people who are in the class are juniors or seniors, which means you'll often find your teammates unavailable for group work as they might be out of town few days a week for interviews (I happen to be such a teammate, *sigh*). A part from that, if luck isn't on your side, you'll be picking up the work of the team members who either wouldn't show up until the project due date, or won't contribute anything to the project, and sometimes slow down the whole team if they decide to jump in with crappy commits along the way.

Finally, I want to say a few words about the exams. I understood pretty much what was taught in the class before the midterm, but ended up doing not-so-well on it. Part of the reason was because I didn't study as much as I should have, but at the same time, being asked to implement the classes/methods that are already built-in the language in some customized way was something that was unusual for me. I learned the lesson and paid the price, so you don't have to if you keep these things in mind.
